# Stage setup

Neatness

Cable issues

Power supply

## At the gig.…

Be there on time to set EVERYTHING up and test it all before the band guys start setting up.
Avoiding headaches: Be prepared!
- Extra cables [line and power]
- Batteries

### Cabling

> Tip: Make sure you have enough power and audio cables for everything, then add at least two spare power , speaker and audio cables.

There areas many different ways of cabling a stage setup as there are musicians, but adhering to certain rules when supplying power to amps and routing sound-signal cables from amps and mikes to the mixing desk will make this a simple task.
In most small-stage environments the signals generated by the various cables should not interfere with each other too much, but in some environments routing cables correctly can improve sound problems dramatically. This is especially true when you are using a single-phase power supply to drive your sound equipment as well as lighting.

Lighting can cause real problems with your PA sound if you are powering your light rig from the same source as your sound equipment. Where possible you should find out if the venue has more than one power phase available. Most actually have a three-phase system and you should make sure that you separate the power for lighting from the power for the sound system and backline. This obviously requires adequate cabling.

Where possible find ways to distinguish between cable types - a guitar cable has braided insulation around a plastic-coated core while speaker cables are made up of two wires - no braid. Open one of the jack covers if you are not sure. Using a speaker cable as a guitar lead will work, but your tone will definitely be way off.

### Backline

The term 'backline' usually refers to all the equipment the musicians use on stage. This includes the amps, monitors, drum kit, mikes, mike-stands as well as any mixers and other paraphernalia required.
From this link we can deduce the following basic requirements:
    * Power for three amps and three effect units
    * Seven mikes with stands and cables
This excludes any power required for the monitors, PA and lights.

I will use a typical configuration for our band - a drum kit, bass guitar, two lead / rhythm guitars, a lead singer, some mikes for backing vox.
1.   Guitars 1 and 2 as well as the bass player use a typical setup ie. guitar plugged through effect pedals into an amp which is miked or lined-out and the signal sent to the mixer.
2.   The kit has two mikes, one for the kick and one for overhead - not normally used.
3.   The lead singer uses a mike for vox and sometimes mouth organ.
4.   All three guitarists sing backing vox.

### Kit

Drummer must have carpet large enough to place the entire drum kit on, but no bigger than that [unless you like the 'loungy' feel and rolled up carpets climbing the walls]! This is critical when you're expected to play on a bare floor, and can be used as a basic template around which all your back-line gear can be arranged.

Once cabling is taken care of the drummer should set up centre-stage [yes, he should].  

If playing in a corner [often happens] and the kit sound is bouncing around [messy], try to pad the area around the kit with speaker covers, guitar cases etc. Can make a huge difference.

On small stages never mike the whole kit up, mike only the kick drum and perhaps snare / hats - the vox mikes will pick up the kit and amplify it through the PA. [This presupposes you have a reasonable kit sound to start with. If you don't it might be a good idea to mike it so you can at least tweak the EQ some, but perhaps the long view is that you should look into learning something about kit sound ?! See the Kit Sound page!]

### Guitars

Enough guitar stands for all guitars on stage  

Backup guitars, tuners, sticks, cables, strings, mike, mike-stands, power-supplies  

## Personal Responsibility

Everyone should have a basic understanding of where everything goes, and how it is cabled  

Get all gear close to where it will be set up  

Never place your monitor or PA speakers where a stage mike might point directly at the speaker. Try it if you want to find out why not.  
> Rule of thumb: the source of the sound must be as good [clean, noiseless, pleasant] as possible - amplifying a bad sound only makes things exponentially worse

> TIP: Loud does not equal better or more powerful - usually it's just loud.  

In cases where everything on stage is miked up, avoid the situation where backline sound is constantly interfering with front-of-house. Rule of thumb: set up the stage and front-of-house sound then turn the monitor system off while the band is playing - if the stage system is too loud you will notice a drop in level up front. This should never happen. In our case this is not possible - we run the guitar and bass amps without mikes, mixing only the kick and vox through the PA [it really works well when controlled tightly from stage].

> Rule of Thumb: Look after your ears - when driving to a gig don't play your sound system full blast, and especially not your iPod, and don't keep the window rolled right down for the fresh air. These items affect your hearing over time, you'll get to the gig and wonder why your sound isn't cutting through. It's not your sound, it's your ears bru.

> TIP: Tip for drummers from George Axiotis: You can use your cymbals as a clear indicator to show whether or not your ears are in good shape, works like this: Sometime during a break from playing [when your ears are rested] set your crash up, then hit it sort of medium hard. Do this muchly over a period of days until you are very familiar with the sound. When you get to the gig, do the same thing and try to ascertain if the sound is any different. If it is, say brighter, then you need to realise that your ears are not picking up tops as clearly as they should - you must then make any EQ adjustments you feel are necessary [front-of-house] based on the fact that you're not hearing the tops clearly. Same goes for bass / mids. This test is particularly important when you do gigs back to back for days - your hearing will definitely be affected negatively and you need to be aware of how they are reacting.

To emulate this from a guitar perspective: Plug your guitar in clean ie. no effects at all, just guitar + cable + amp. Get familiar with the sound on lead pickup / full tops and rhythm pickup / full bass. When you get to the gig do it again, but bear in mind this can be somewhat subjective as your strings might be crudded up, or old. Use the EXACT same cable though [it's amazing the difference a cable can make to your sound - more on this later].

### Band placement  on stage

Where the band is going to be placed is usually the last thing on the club owner / manager's mind. This means you often find yourself in an unsatisfactory situation - pre-empt this as much as possible by visiting the venue and finding the best possible place to play. You need to know how much floor area you require for a minimal setup [when you're all on stage and nobody is being side-swiped by the person next to them's guitar]. Discuss the options with the manager / owner. Given a logical argument they will usually agree with your demands.

### Pricing

Always ascertain the procedure for drinks beforehand, and find out if you get discount / write offs etc. Same goes for food. We always run a band tab and pay it at the end of the night. That way everyone's got money when it's time to cough up! And the worst that can happen is you pay full price for everything. The best is [on a really good night] the club owner might write the bill off completely. Now isn't that nice?  

Find out if you are required to provide background music or MC functionality - if so, depending on the parameters, you might consider re-negotiating your price.  

Never do additional sets beyond the already agreed number without negotiating an additional fee. Ever.  

Pitch the cost of the band correctly, but don't sell yourself short by dropping your price. Ever.  

Private functions always fetch a higher price - anything from 20-400% higher than club gigs! Know your client. We did a gig where we were paid 4 times the price of a whole night for only one hour on stage - and we got to spend the night in a 5 star hotel up in the mountains. They paid happily. Know your client.
